briefing i'm joined today by the chief
executive of the nhs simon stevens
and the deputy chief medical officer
jenny harris
i'd like to update you all on the facts
uh on the spread of covert 19
and the steps that we are taking in the
battle against the coronavirus
113 777 people
have now been tested for the virus
of those 14 543
have tested positive an increase in the
last day
of 2885.
the best scientific analysis now is that
the rate of infection
has been doubling every three to four
days
and of those who have contracted the
virus
759 have sadly died
our thoughts and prayers are with the
families of those
who have passed away these figures
are a powerful reminder of the need for
all of us to act
we need to slow the spread of the virus
and strengthen
the nhs ability to protect us all
strict social distancing measures have
been put in place
to restrict the spread of covet 19
so fewer people should need hospital
treatment at any one
time the measures that we've put in
place follow scientific and medical
advice
and are designed to reduce the rate of
infection
and as well as acting to slow the spread
of the virus
we're also acting to strengthen the nhs
we're expanding the number of beds
available for new patients
we're increasing the number of staff in
our hospitals and we're also investing
in life-saving equipment
for those with severe symptoms to give
people the care they need
when they need it most i'd like to thank
all those involved in this effort to
reinforce the front
line in the battle against the virus
the military personnel who are helping
to fit out a new hospital in east london
and are helping to distribute personal
protective equipment
the amazing doctors nurses and support
staff
in our nhs those in manufacturing
who've risen to the challenge of
producing new ventilators
and the hundreds of thousands who
volunteered to help
in innumerable ways this is a united
national effort and the spirit of
selflessness
shown by so many is truly inspiring
and this virus of course affects us all
as you're no doubt already aware the
prime minister has coronavirus
and is self-isolating at home in downing
street
he began experiencing mild symptoms
yesterday afternoon
and was tested on the advice of
england's chief medical officer
professor chris whittie the prime
minister is continuing to lead the
government's response to coronavirus
chairing meetings and communicating with
key members of his team
through video conferencing and earlier
today the prime minister led the effort
in launching our latest front in the
fight against covered 19.
today i can announce that the prime
minister has brought together businesses
research institutes and universities in
a new alliance
to boost testing capacity for frontline
workers
increasing our testing capacity is
absolutely crucial
in our response to and our fight against
coronavirus
this is a particular priority for those
who work in the health and social care
sector
and are working so hard to keep us all
safe this will be antigen testing
testing whether people currently have
the disease so that our health and
social care workers
can have security in the knowledge that
they are safe to return to work
if their test is negative these tests
will be trialled for people on the front
line starting
immediately with hundreds to take place
by the end of the weekend
dramatically scaling up next week and of
course protecting our frontline workers
is at the forefront of everyone's minds
at the moment last night millions of
people
paid a fantastic tribute to the heroes
and heroines of the nhs
when they stepped outside their front
doors and clapped our carers
and alongside those in health and social
care i also want to thank those who work
in food production and retail
those who work for the royal mail and
public transport our teachers
and our social workers they all deserve
our gratitude
and having talked to trade union and
business leaders civil servants and
public spirited volunteers
and of course ministers in the devolved
administrations in scotland wales and
northern ireland in recent days
i want to record my admiration for the
national solidarity being shown
in the fight against this disease all of
us can support
our nhs by continuing to follow the
guidance
to stay at home to protect our nhs
and to save lives and i'll now turn to
the chief executive of the nhs
simon stevens simon thank you michael
today over 6 200 confirmed positive
coronavirus patients
are in hospital across england and we
know that number is
only bound to rise over the coming days
that's why as michael says it is so
important
that everybody follows the medical
advice to
stay at home and in so doing save lives
but it's also why the nhs is making an
extraordinary effort right across this
country
to ensure that we have care for those
patients who need
the looking after from coronavirus
that's why nhs staff are pulling out all
the stops
in an unprecedented response to this
global health emergency
as of today across england we have
reconfigured hospital services
so that 33 000 hospital beds
are available to treat further
coronavirus patients
it's also why we are taking the
extraordinary action to build new
hospitals
in very short order starting with the
nhs nightingale hospital
in east london and today because this is
a problem
of course not just confined to london
but across the whole country
i have given the go-ahead to the
building of
two further of these nhs nightingale
hospitals
beginning at the birmingham national
exhibition centre
and the manchester central convention
center
with further such hospitals to follow in
doing that i obviously want to pay
tribute to the
contribution not just of nhs staff but
the support that we're getting from
volunteers from the armed forces from
social care
from all of our partners it is
remarkable i think that
in just the last two weeks we've seen
eighteen
thousand doctors and nurses returned to
practice
on the general medical council and the
nursing medical council registers
answering the call to arms and
it was therefore very gratifying for our
staff across the nhs
to see this remarkable outpouring in the
clap for carers
last night for many nurses coming home
from
a day at hospital or for other staff
returning
to start again for the night shift it
will have meant an enormous amount to
know that the whole country
is behind them but the best way we can
show that support of course
is actually by doing what it will take
to reduce
the rate of infection because even
simple actions
following this advice will save lives
thank you very much simon i'll i'll now
turn to uh
the media to take questions and i think
our first question
is from vicki young of the bbc vicky
mr gov the prime minister has
coronavirus
uh the health secretary does as well the
chief medical officer is in isolation
people will be looking at this and may
be wondering whether you haven't been
taking your own advice
or you may be acted too slowly when it
came to stopping the spread of
coronavirus
uh another question pleased to sir simon
stevens
uh we've had cancer patients getting in
touch with the bbc today very worried
about
the cancellation or postponement of
their treatment or operations many of
them worried
that their own lives uh may be being put
at risk
and a question for dr harris if i could
can you be more precise about the peak
of this outbreak well thank you vicky
i'll turn to uh
to simon to jenny in a second um i think
uh the fact that both the prime minister
and
the health secretary have contracted the
virus is a reminder
that the virus does not discriminate we
are all at risk and that is why it is so
important that we practice
social distancing measures those are in
place
in government ministers are working
remotely and from home
using video conferencing in order to
make sure that we can
uh follow the strict advice that all of
us should be following
in order to help to protect the nhs
simon
on the question of cancer care we've
been clear that we do want
essential and urgent cancer treatments
to continue
but that cancer specialists should have
the opportunity
with their patients to decide whether
it is more risky for somebody to embark
on treatment at this particular time
given
that you are more vulnerable to
infection if you begin a course of
treatment
perhaps chemo or become
immunocompromised as a result
so those are clinical decisions that
will need to be taken
we've also agreed a landmark deal with
all of the independent hospitals across
the country which
has given us the ability to look after
patients
away from the busy hospitals that are
treating coronavirus and in
london for example the royal marsden is
therefore coordinating cancer care
right across the capital so that even if
patients aren't being looked after at
their local hospital
they will be getting the care they need
but these are very
uh difficult and sensitive judgments
that need to be made with the full
involvement of cancer clinicians as well
as patients
thank you simon thank you um yes i'm
going to be a little bit repetitive for
the same question i think was asked
yesterday from a different media
colleague
it would be very foolish of me i think
to predict precisely when we expect the
peak to be
not least because we have put in social
distancing interventions
and we are looking to see how well they
work
as i said yesterday there's some early
indication that the public are really
now heeding
that advice and we thank them for that
it's really important that they continue
to do that
we do not expect to see a significant
change in our numbers for two or three
weeks
and so we really need people to stick
with us and stick to those social
distancing interventions for that period
we are of course monitoring uh that data
daily
and we will obviously when we've got a
firm prediction then we'll be happy to
share that with you
thank you thank you vicky i'll now turn
to carl dylan of itv
thank you mr grove obviously it's good
news that we've heard
that the prime minister is only
experiencing mild symptoms but
i'd like to know what is the plan should
the prime minister
not be able to continue with his work
and also given that there does seem to
be a limit to the number of tests that
can be done
what is the system for testing uh people
like yourselves at the
top of government who are dealing with
this crisis
well carl the the prime minister has uh
only mild symptoms um
uh he took part in uh he chaired a video
conference earlier today
and he was able to marshal the resources
of
the nhs and different government
departments and indeed of the private
sector in order to bring forward the
testing initiative that we've announced
today but i'll hand over to jenny
to say a little bit more about the
testing protocols that guide the way
in which uh people are tested and a
little bit
uh then i'll turn to simon forgive me to
say a little bit more
about our ambitions to uh and support
frontline nhs staff with the extension
of testing so jenny first of all thank
you so
um as i stated previously the primary
objective of all of our testing is to
ensure that we manage clinical
uh cases safely so those patients who
are admitted
to intensive care with acute respiratory
disease syndrome or with pneumonia
are the ones we're focusing on and again
for other admissions
into hospitals with those conditions we
test routinely
in some other very specific areas so
care homes for example where we know
that there are
critical patients at risk at higher risk
and where there is a higher risk of
disease spread
the basis of all of this is firstly that
you must have clinical symptoms the
default position without that
is you would not be tested and then
the only other criteria would be the
centrality of your role to the
covid 19 response and
in in this particular case i'm sure your
viewers
will understand that the prime minister
plays a very critical role in that
and that's the basis for our testing
thanks jenny simon
well from an nhs perspective we think it
is urgently important that we are able
to
test frontline staff who are off sick or
otherwise
isolating and that's why the work that
public health england has been
leading is so important because it means
that we're going to be able to
double by this time next week the number
of tests compared to
the number that we've been doing this
week and so
i can say that today we're announcing
that we will be
rolling out staff testing across the nhs
beginning next week
starting with the critical care nurses
other staff and intensive
care emergency departments ambulance
services
gps and as the testing volumes continue
to increase
we want to expand that to a wider range
of essential
public service workers including our
social care services
as well as of course continuing with the
patient testing which is so vital
thank you simon uh we'll now turn to
beth rigby from sky
hi hi can you hear me sorry thank you mr
gave just a
couple of questions please um mr gave
you say the prime minister and the
health secretary getting the virus shows
it doesn't discriminate unfortunately
they only have
mild symptoms but you can't guarantee
that they won't become more poorly
at the very moment that the country and
the nhs mostly
need them to lead lots of people
watching this
will be asking why the prime minister
the health secretary
and now the chief medical officer
weren't better protected
isn't this at best careless and at worst
negligent and to simon stevens a couple
of questions if i may
the new london hospital will have 500
intensive care beds by next week
how much spare capacity is there in
london's critical care beds today
how do you expect that to change over
the weekend
and do you anticipate you'll be over
capacity by next week
and just on the testing and nh staff
great news that you're going to roll out
testing
but how many nhs staff are currently
unable to work
because they're either unwell or
self-isolating
thank you oh thank you beth
um the the fact that the virus is no
respecter
of um you know uh uh individuals whoever
they are
is one of the reasons why we do need to
have strict social distancing measures
so that we can reduce the rate of
infection and reduce the pressure
on the nhs there have been various
estimates about the number of people
in any country who may become infected
over time
we aim to as the prime minister himself
has pointed out
flatten the curve reduce the rate of
reinfection
in order to ensure that the nhs can be
protected um and i think that many
people will reflect on the fact that
uh the prime minister uh succumbing to
uh the virus
is a reminder of how seriously we all
need to take the advice
that the nhs has been giving us simon uh
thank you yes so on the question of
london hospital beds
uh as of uh yesterday the most recent
figures
we had uh just under three thousand uh
empty and available hospital beds across
london
and as you say beth we are bringing on
additional beds
next week at the new nhs nightingale
hospital
that is being configured initially to be
able to look after up to 500 patients
but there is the physical capacity to
potentially
take that to up to 4 000 if it were
required
so there is obviously an enormous effort
going on not just across london
but across the midlands as well where
we're seeing uh continued growth in
cases
and that's why as well as freeing up the
000 hospital beds across our current
english nhs hospitals
we are also taking these unprecedented
steps to build in a few days
hospitals that would normally take years
thank you very much and we'll turn now
to andrew woodcock from the independent
mr gove um there are large numbers of
people around the uk who are reliant on
food distribution through
food banks and other charitable efforts
these charities are still working but
many food banks have closed and
donations are down
many volunteers are over 70 and they've
been advised to stay home
the independent's launching a help the
hungry appeal to support the london food
alliance but there's
need right across the country the
government says it's supporting all
sections of society through this crisis
so is there going to be financial and
logistical support for these charities
um are any of the 700 000 people who've
volunteered to help the nhs being
committed to this effort
and so simon stevens could i ask them
you've been
head of the nhs since 2013 do you regret
the bed reductions and the failure to
increase
nurse training numbers during your
tenure which have left the nhs in a
position
where entered this crisis with its
critical care bed base amongst the worst
in europe
with italy for example having twice as
many icu beds
and the uk having the lowest number of
nurses and doctors per head amongst
developed nations according to the oecd
isn't the lesson from this crisis that
the nhs needs more capacity at all times
if it's going to be ready to deal with
this kind of surge in demand
and it can't be made to operate with no
slack as it has been under your watch
andrew thank you for those questions on
food and helping the vulnerable
let me say a few things the first thing
is i want to thank um all those who work
in fruit production and in our
supermarkets
for uh rising to the challenge of making
sure that our shelves can be refilled
um and that people who need it are able
to get the food
that they need now of course we need
more than simply to have an effective
food production chain we need to make
sure that those most in need
those who are self-isolating get the
food and the other support that they
need
that's why the the nhs has identified up
to 1.5 million people
who are shielded who've been advised to
self-isolate for 12 weeks
and it's why government departments
working together are ensuring that there
will be
food distributed direct to those
individuals
with community pharmacies also providing
the prescription medicines that they
need
now there are people beyond that 1.5
million who
are not self-isolating for 12 weeks but
who are vulnerable
people who in the past have used food
banks people whom we need to support
now and it is the case that the
volunteer networks that have been set up
across the country are ensuring that we
can match volunteers
who are willing to go shopping and to
hand food to those vulnerable people
who are staying at home or who may not
themselves have the social networks
to get the food that they need and of
course the tremendous
uh response to the good sam initiative
that matt hancock announced earlier this
week
with hundreds of thousands of people
stepping up is
an amazing example of voluntarism in
action and national solidarity
and we will be doing everything we can
to support them and my colleague oliver
dowden
at the department of culture media and
sport is looking at a specific fund
in order to support charities in the
work that they
do and we'll be seeing more about this
in the days to come i also want to thank
those people
in the hospitality and catering sector
who have stepped up and who are doing
everything they can
to support the vulnerable um uh john
vincent of lyon
is making sure that uh his stores remain
open as takeaways
in order to support the nhs it's
that sort of collaboration between
citizens
the voluntary sector backing from
government and enlightened business
people
that i think will help us to beat this
virus um and i'm grateful to you for the
opportunity
uh to uh thank all those who are making
that contribution
i'm gonna hand over to simon thank you
so
the nhs does need more staff and it does
need more
hospital beds and we've been uh saying
that for some time and
that is what's going to be happening
over the next five and the next 10 years
but the reality is that what i've
described is that over the last several
weeks
we have freed up the equivalent of 50
hospitals across england
ready and waiting for coronavirus
patients under normal circumstances you
would not
keep 50 hospitals fully staffed with
nurses and doctors
not actually looking after patients
which is why no health service in the
world
anywhere in europe anywhere
internationally would be able to
withstand
a coronavirus epidemic unless the sort
of measures that the public are also
involved
with are also put into place and that's
why it's so important that
the public support the work of our very
pressurized frontline
nurses doctors therapists and other
staff across the nhs
by staying at home and in so doing
saving lives
thank you and we'll turn now to tim ross
from bloomberg
thank you um michael gove uh we were
told before the decision was taken
on monday to impose much stricter rules
on people's movements
that that decision would be based
rigorously on the data around
footfall and public activity and
transport
yet despite asking every day this week
the government has not so far provided
any of that data to justify the most
sweeping restrictions on the population
the country has ever seen will you
promise now to publish that data
and could you explain why it hasn't been
published so far
to simon stevens can you guarantee that
the nhs is ready for what's about to
come
and if not what is the one thing you
still need from the government
to prepare yourselves
uh thank you tim um on on the data uh at
every stage
we have followed uh the scientific and
medical advice that we've been given
and we believe that we've taken the
right steps at the right times
and the evidence shows that since the
measures that we took on monday the
the british public have responded um in
a uh a fantastic way
and we've seen a dramatic decline in the
use of public transport
allowing public transport to be
increasing the preserve of key workers
we've seen a decline in footfall um and
people are
the overwhelming majority of the british
people are uh
following the uh the strong advice that
has been given
in order to protect our nhs and of
course we will share that data with you
one of the the features of today's
briefing um
was the uh the the set of numbers
that i and simon shared with you and of
course we will share figures
share data in a spirit of transparency
so that people can see that we are doing
everything that we can but i'll hand
over to simon
first of all to answer your question um
on the
uh uh additional help and support
that we can give the nhs i honestly
believe that
everybody across the nhs is doing
everything that can possibly be done
to ensure that we're able to best look
after patients who need our care
during this coronavirus pandemic
one of the points that i think has been
particularly remarkable actually over
the last several weeks
is the way not only the nhs but all
public services have come together
that's true for local councils that's
true for care homes it's true for the
voluntary sector
and across government we have had the
support of the ministry of defence
we've had the support of other parts of
government helping us
prepare in different communities because
as michael said a moment ago
we earlier this week wrote to up to one
and a half million people
asking them to take special care given
their background health conditions
and for them to be able to stay at home
in that very
self-contained way requires people who
can help with
shopping who can help collect medicines
from the pharmacy
that's an enormous team effort that the
nhs by itself can't do
and we are getting that support i might
just ask jenny just to say a little bit
about
uh data social distancing measures and
the appropriateness of the
of the steps that we take jen um thank
you um
so i think as we've said we've been
trying to be uh
transparent with this but uh very
confident that at all stages the
government has acted on the science
um it is an unprecedented event as i
think we're all recognizing
um and there is some degree of
uncertainty with this so with some of
the data
as you acquire the data and the steps go
into place actually your data changes so
the earlier conversation around when
will the peak be
well it depends how successful we are so
there is a bit of a moving agenda on
some
of the data but absolutely clear that we
have acted
we have looked at the modelling we have
taken those interventions
in order which we know will produce the
biggest impact
and we have steadily implemented those
and the last ones of course in relation
to strict social distancing and
particularly the shielding of very
very clinically vulnerable people is an
important step to time appropriately
not because just least because of the
risks of them with coronavirus
but because they have multi-morbidities
they have other problems and they need a
lot of social support
so in this country we have timed them
really carefully
to ensure that those social support
systems are around to maintain them
through the period
of uh isolation thank you jenny and i'll
turn now to hugo guy from the eye
newspaper
hugo mr gove it sounds like you
and your cabinet colleagues are not
going to be automatically tested for
coronavirus
despite the fact that the prime minister
and the health secretary
have tested positive can you confirm
that that's the case that there's no
plans
to test all of you and if so explain
exactly why
and can i ask i think this is probably a
question for dr harry's we've heard a
lot about
the prospect of getting kits that can
test for whether or not someone has ever
had coronavirus we're told that three
and a half million of those
are on order um can you clarify
have those kits already been
manufactured
and if so by whom have they been
manufactured what company is producing
those
thanks thanks well thank you hugo
um uh people are tested um uh if they
are symptomatic
um and uh those members of um
uh the uh the sort of central effort in
helping to defeat the virus
who do show symptoms are appropriately
tested
but i think you can tell from the fact
that the three of us are here uh
demonstrates that there are three of us
who have not yet demonstrated any
symptoms
but it is important in order as we
mentioned earlier
to try to ensure that we uh slow the
spread of the virus
that everyone everyone wherever possible
practices
the appropriate social distancing
disciplines that we've announced earlier
um i'll i'll hand over to jenny and also
to simon just for a final word as well
jenny so actually i might just add to
the points you've just made so as i said
earlier we have very clear
testing criteria so we would not in the
early phase of the
outbreak we would have strong
containment and
contact tracing mechanisms that is not
appropriate at this point in the
epidemic in the uk but we will test
appropriately for clinical management
the appropriate thing to do if you have
symptoms is to self-isolate and remove
yourself
from the environment so you can't
potentially transmit disease to anybody
else and that applies just as much to
the cabinet members as it does to myself
or any other part of the population
the only other criteria would be about
the centrality of your role
to cover 19 and it's exactly why simon
has highlighted the importance of
testing
uh our workforce and other first
responders as well who are keeping
the response going um in relation to the
uh the 3.5 million testing that
the have you had it as a right as
opposed to the have you got it to test
they are coming from a variety of
different manufacturers and i think as
professor witty has said before it is
really critical
that each of those ones is tested we
test the sensitivity
and the specificity of the test so how
frequently we can pick up
the disease and then how sure we are
that it's a true positive test
and each of the different types of those
testing kits will
will be evaluated thank you
i'm going to leave the last word with
simon son well i think it's
simply to say that unfortunately
pressure on the nhs
is going to intensify over the coming
weeks there's no doubt about that
before things hopefully begin to improve
and so
this is going to be a time when a lot of
our frontline staff are going to be
in highly stressful and pressurized
circumstances
but i think what they would want me to
say to the rest of the country
is know this that everybody is pulling
out all of the stops to do the right
thing
and if you can help too by following the
measures that have been set out
staying at home you will save lives
thank you all very much thank you
you